This is an interview with Eloy Rodriguez by Jaime
Rodriguez on November 20, 1990, at Thomas
Jefferson Junior High School, Beagle, Texas,
concerning the Vietnam War. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge, I'm asking you to donate
this tape to me or to the Texas A&M oral history
collection in the university archives. Is that
all right with you? Yes, it's all right. Please
state your name. It's Eloy Rodriguez. And your
date of birth? October the 3rd, 1945. Okay, where
did you grow up? I grew up in Beaver, Texas. What
made you decide to join the Marines? Well, at that
time, Jaime, the draft was in effect, and if you
weren't in school and you were of age, you were
being drafted. At the time, I was working in Los
Angeles, California, and I got my draft notice in
Texas, so I saw that as a way to get back home. as an
excuse to get back home. So I came back and I was
going to get drafted. So what I did, I went ahead and
enlisted in the Marine Corps under the lay
program. So I enlisted in January, but I didn't go
in until late for the 14th. How long were you in the
Marines before you went to Vietnam? My first day of
boot camp was April the 14th, 1966. And going back
to your previous question, I joined the Marine
Corps because everyone was joining the Marine
Corps, all my friends. And if you didn't join the
Marine Corps, you weren't really too popular with
the other guys. That's the reason I jumped. But I
was in the Marine Corps. Boot camp was April the
14th, 1966. I took my basic training in San Diego.
Then I went to Camp Pelton, California. After
that, I went to Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. We
did a tour in Puerto Rico for a couple of months.
Then I came back, and I had my orders from Vietnam in
August of 1967. When you first went to the war, did
you feel that the war was winnable? Well, to be
honest with you, Jaime, I didn't know that much
about what was going on. All I knew was that we had a
lot of men over there. I knew we had a war. I knew that
if you went in the Marine Corps and you didn't go to
Vietnam, that you weren't really a Marine until
you went over there. As far as whether the war was
winnable or not, I assumed that it was. What they
were telling us was that it would be a matter of
months before we came back, that we would win this
thing at any time. So I went over there on a 13-month
tour, but expecting to come back any time before.
You said you were stationed at different
locations. around the United States, but when you
went to Vietnam, where were you stationed? I was at
Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. I got there about
the middle of January of 67, and I was there until
August of 67 with a little tour to Puerto Rico. What
were your job descriptions in the Marines? When I
graduated from boot camp, my MOS, which is what you
do in the military, 2533, that's a radio telegraph
operator. I went to school for approximately four
months in San Diego. But once I left school, I
didn't see the telegraph team anymore. I went to
June, Camp of June, and I became a radio operator,
which is 2531. When I got to Vietnam, I was a radio
operator for an infantry company, 2531. But I also
became a wireman, which I think was a 2511. I became
a murder man, which was in 03-41, I believe. I also
served as a rifleman, which was in 03-11. So I had
various MOSs. I picked them up, OJT, they called
them, on the job training. During the time of
combat, what was the morale like of the soldiers?
Well, it's difficult to say. When you're over here
in the States, boy, you just can't wait to go over
there to serve your country and do what the other
Marines are doing. Again, you can call yourself a
true Marine unless you went over there. But as time
got closer to go to Vietnam, you start getting a
little shaky and not knowing what to expect. For
whatever reasons, I felt that I was going to be a
telegraph operator. And I got over there. They
were up front with me as a radio operator. So my
morale when I got over there, I was scared. But as I
went to my base camp, I saw that other guys were
there. And I was scared because of the unknown. I
didn't know what to expect. The morale was good in
the rear when I first got there. But once you go out
on patrols and things of this nature, You, even as a
young man, you start thinking of other things. The
people back home, girlfriend, parents, what are
people doing back in America? You are 19, 20 years
old. You don't know if you're going to come back.
You're a lot more careful now. You're much more
mature beyond your years as far as thinking ahead
again about your families. You are a lot more
careful. You listen to the guys who have been there
before. You do what they ask you to do, because
they're the ones who know. They're the ones who
have been there. So again, I was there in the early
part of it. I was there in 67, 68, which was a lot
different from 70, 71, 72. So the morale, I feel,
was high. We believed what they told us. We felt
that we had a purpose to be over there. We felt that
we were doing the right thing. What were your
personal feelings toward Arvin? Well, again,
Jaime, when I got there, the word was that don't
trust the Arvins. They don't want to fight.
They'll go out with you, and if the action gets too
heavy, they're going to retreat on their own.
They're not good at following instructions.
Personally, I didn't like them. because of what I
had heard and the little I saw. I couldn't trust
them. The other people that were around me
wouldn't trust them. They had a way about them that
was very untrustworthy. It seemed like they were
out to get whatever they could get from you,
whether it was food or money or weapons or
whatever. I didn't like them. I didn't trust them.
I didn't know what they were up to. How was the
racism situation as far as the U.S. military and
the Vietnamese people, or any kind of racism?
Well, we felt that they weren't our equal. We felt
that we were there to help them, and they should be
grateful for that. We treated them as
second-class citizens. To us, they weren't up to
par with us. And I think they felt, some of them felt
the same way about us. I still remember going
through a village, and there was maybe about 100
little kids, six, seven, eight-year-olds. And
someone took a camera and took their pictures, and
every single one of those kids shot us the finger.
So at that time, this was like in October of 67,
things went through my mind. I said, well, we're
here to help them. But now I see this. I don't know
what's going on. Once you got back into the States,
was it hard to get back into the American swing of
things? Well, in a way, yes, and in a way, no, Jaime.
I remember when we went over there, we went through
all kinds of counseling sessions, being nice to
their people, with their guests, do this, do that.
We'd come back, and no one tells us how the, how the
world is going to react to us, especially the
United States. They don't tell us what's been
going on here for the last year. And when you're
over there, especially when you're in the rear,
you talk about home. You talk about when you come
back, oh, I'm going to school, I'm getting
married, I'm going to do this, I'm going to do that.
And when you come back, you do all those things.
Sometimes you try and get everything in as quickly
as possible. You want to get married. You want to
get a job. You want to get back to school.
And there's changes. Really, when I came back, I
just wanted to do all those things we talked about.
And now I feel that maybe I was too quick in doing
some of those things. What were some of the
strategies that the United States used to try to
win this war? Well, the bombing, bombing of the
North, the bombing of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, the
what's it called, the Agent Orange,
what they call the Vietnamization of the
countryside, where we were sent out people to work
with the farmers, with the small villages, and
trying to win them over. Those are the ones I
remember at this time. I'm sure there was a lot of
others. But I don't think it helped. If anything,
it was the bombing of the North. That might have
been effective. But as far as Vietnamizing the
countryside and the villages, no. They would go to
the person who was there last. If we were there,
they were on our side. And the Arvins, which is the
Army of the Republic of Vietnam. I'm sorry, the
NVA, the North Vietnamese Army. When they were
there, well, they had control. So I don't feel any
in-country. By that, I mean South Vietnam.
Anything we did in South Vietnam, it didn't seem to
work. OK. As far as the search and destroy strategy
went, did you feel that was an effective strategy
in episode one? Well, not really, because we
searched and we destroyed. It wasn't really
because what it did, it made a lot of enemies.
You're talking about people who have been there
for generations and generations, parents,
grandparents, great-grandparents. They all
came from that village, and here comes these big
American soldiers, and they're burning it down,
they're relocating you. You're having to start
all over. I don't think it was effective in that
sense. Whatever we destroyed, it was replaced by
the... by the Viet Cong or the NBA. So I feel that it
wasn't effective.
Did you personally agree with this war? Again, I
was there in the early part of the war. This thing
started, I think, in March of 65. And when I got
there in September of 67, it was still popular.
Most of the United States felt we were doing the
right thing. So I felt good about going over there,
again, because of what they told us, what you
heard. And that's the reason we said those things,
because that's all they told us. Again, the early
part of the war, we felt that we were doing good. And
as things turned out, because of the lack of
support and what I've heard say, because of a few
vocal minority, we were forced to do a lot of
things. Instead of going all out and trying to win
this war. Because even if we did, we might have not
won it. OK. Once the war started getting towards
the end and the American people started feeling
that it was not going to be a winnable war, there was
a bunch of anti-war protests. What were your
feelings on that? Well, at that time and until very
recently, I really hated it. And I guess, in a
sense, I still do. Here you were. putting your life
on the line. That was the fact that many young
Americans died because they were defending the
same rights that I feel these people were abusing
by protesting the war. Again, that was another
thing that happened that forced our people in
Washington to turn their back on us in a way where
they were beginning to listen to the voters or to
the people who were protesting. And the war, it
wasn't a standstill, but there was so much
conflict with people for and against the war, that
this thing, it seemed like the North Vietnamese
purposely let it run more because they could see
what was happening in the United States. It was a
split United States. And the ones that were really
being hurt were the people who were over there.
Well, again, by the end of the war, the United
States people started thinking it wasn't worth
it. and all this news was getting back to the
soldiers, did the morale change at all? Well, it
did change. Again, I was there earlier, and it had
to have changed, because those guys were here when
all this was going on. They didn't get over there
until 70, 71, 72. So they saw all of this before they
left. They knew that a lot of America was against
this war. And again, it was two different wars, 65
to probably the end of 68, early 69. You had the
people who wanted to be over there, about 80. And
this is, I'm just guesstimating, about 80% of the
people from 65 to early, early 69 wanted to be
there. But after that, you started getting all the
draftees from the middle of 69 on till the war was
over. A lot of those guys over there were draftees
who didn't want to be over there. So the attitude
was different. They knew that. that people in
America weren't supporting, so they didn't want
to get killed or whatever. It seemed like a lost
cause to them. Hey, did the combat refusals become
a problem? Not when I was there, especially in the
Marine Corps. I don't know how the Army reacted,
but the Marine Corps, I feel, is a very elite group.
Whether you're a... you can't... Say, I'm not
going. There's just too many people against you.
So that never, to us, again in 67, 68, that never
crossed our minds. There was times we didn't want
to go. There's no way we were going to say no,
because we were going to go anyway. No one was going
to let us stay behind. So we were going to go one way
or the other. So we never said no. I know towards the
latter part of the war, there was a lot of that.
Maybe it was with reason. I don't know if I would
have been in the Army in 1972, and I might have
refused, yes. Could you describe a typical day
during the war? Well, it all depended on what you
were doing that day. If you were in the rear, it was a
lot more work. There was more people watching you.
Maybe you had... kitchen work to do, maybe you had
radio watches during the day, you wrote letters.
If you were getting ready to go out, well, then
that's when you wrote your personal letters to
your girlfriend, wives, parents, telling them
you were going to go out and be back in maybe a week.
So if they don't hear from you, that's why. I was on a
hospital ship, the USS Princeton. And we usually
would go back for a day or two, take a shower, eat a
meal, and we knew we were going out. It was called a
BLT, Battalion Landing Team. What we did, we
cruised the coast of South Vietnam. We did this for
a couple of months. And whenever someone got in
trouble, the helicopters would take us out. And
it's kind of an empty feeling. It's like you don't
know where you're going or what's going to happen.
It's kind of a quiet moment for everyone. You just
sit there and get your thoughts together and go out
and do your job.
Once you got back, how did the people treat you?
Well, the majority of them... Well, let me restate
that. The majority of my friends welcomed me back.
They were glad I was back. They were glad... that I
came back in one piece. It's people that you didn't
know. I enrolled at Bee County College, and there
was a couple of instructors there who kind of
didn't make you feel comfortable because they
seemed like they were against the war. I remember
in speech, I gave a presentation on the war. And the
guy, I thought it was at least a C, of course. But it
seemed like the guy just wasn't too gung ho about
what was happening over there. So I received a D. So
from people I didn't know, it just wasn't the same.
It got to where anyone who you didn't know, you
wouldn't talk to them about Vietnam. Okay, now I
realize that this may be a touchy subject, but did
you kill anyone during combat? And if so, how are
you coping with it now? Well, we killed quite a few
people. I was a caisson, a battle of caisson from
the middle of January to late April. I'm sorry,
late March, early April. And as a unit, we had, I
think the estimates are, I think, over 15,000. my
own company. I know we're responsible for quite a
few. We try to overrun us one night. We put mortars
on a lot of them. I don't know how many we killed. As
far as it bothered me, I try never, never to think
about things like that. It's just something that
it's kind of a deep secret, something that you did
that you don't want to tell anyone. I don't even
like to to remember any details of it. Somehow, for
some reason, I just refuse to remember the details
about our killing. I do remember, in a lot of
detail, our men
that were killed. That's because someone you were
with all the time. And yes, our unit killed a lot of
North Vietnamese. OK. Well, that's all the
questions I have. I'd like to thank you for taking
time and participating in this interview. And
that's it. Thank you very much, Hank.